The French Revolution had general causes common to all the revolutions of the West at the end of the 18th century and particular causes that explain why it was by far the most violent and the most universally significant of these revolutions.
The peasants, many of whom owned land, had attained an improved standard of living and education and wanted to get rid of the last vestiges of feudalism so as to acquire the full rights of landowners and to be free to increase their holdings.
For France, which with 26 million inhabitants in 1789 was the most populated country of Europe, the problem was most acute.
On June 17 the bitter struggle over this legal issue finally drove the deputies of the Third Estate to declare themselves the National Assembly; they threatened to proceed, if necessary, without the other two orders.
Rumours of an “aristocratic conspiracy” by the king and the privileged to overthrow the Third Estate led to the Great Fear of July 1789, when the peasants were nearly panic-stricken.
In the provinces, the Great Fear of July led the peasants to rise against their lords.
The Parisians rose again and on October 5 marched to Versailles.
The National Constituent Assembly followed the court, and in Paris it continued to work on the new constitution.
The French population participated actively in the new political culture created by the Revolution.
The National Constituent Assembly completed the abolition of feudalism, suppressed the old “orders,” established civil equality among men (at least in metropolitan France, since slavery was retained in the colonies), and made more than half the adult male population eligible to vote, although only a small minority met the requirement for becoming a deputy.
The principles underlying the administration of justice were also radically changed, and the system was adapted to the new administrative divisions.
Likewise, all those who wanted changes in England, Ireland, the German states, the Austrian lands, or Italy looked upon the Revolution with sympathy.
In accordance with this principle, the papal territory of Avignon was reunited with France on September 13, 1791.
France declared war against Austria on April 20, 1792.
Belgium, the Rhineland, Savoy, and the county of Nice were occupied by French armies.
Austria, Prussia, and Great Britain formed a coalition (later called the First Coalition), to which most of the rulers of Europe adhered.
The Girondin leaders were driven from the National Convention, and the Montagnards, who had the support of the Paris sansculottes (workers, craftsmen, and shopkeepers), seized power and kept it until 9 Thermidor, year II, of the new French republican calendar (July 27, 1794).
At the same time, the revolutionary government raised an army of more than one million men.
Thanks to this army, the war entered its fourth phase (beginning in the spring of 1794). A brilliant victory over the Austrians at Fleurus on 8 Messidor, year II (June 26, 1794), enabled the French to reoccupy Belgium. Victory made the Terror and the economic and social restrictions seem pointless.
Soon after his fall the Maximum was abolished, the social laws were no longer applied, and efforts toward economic equality were abandoned.
A few days later the National Convention dispersed.
Great Britain, however, remained at war with France.
This disaster encouraged the formation of a Second Coalition of powers alarmed by the progress of the Revolution.